This lecture gives an example
of an associational analysis and
how to use formal modeling
to challenge your findings.
The basic form of a model in
an associational analysis will look
something like this.
You'll have an outcome, y and
you'll have a key predictor, x.
And then you have maybe some potential
confounder that will call z.
And then you have some independent
random error that we call epsilon.
In addition to those factors,
we have a number of parameters
that we wanna estimate.
So alpha here is the intercept.
It's the value of y when x and z are zero.
We have beta, which is the change in y
associated with a one unit increase in x,
adjusted for z.
And then gamma is the change in y
associated with a one-unit increase in z,
adjusting for x.
So, this is a linear model, and
the parameter that we're trying
to estimate here is beta.
That's what tells us how our outcome
changes along with our key predictor.
Now, there are other parameters, gamma and
alpha, that are in the model and
we need to have them in the model for
the model to work.
But we're actually not
interested in those parameters.
So we sometimes call
them nuisance parameters,
because we have to estimate them, but
we don't actually care about their value.
So this is what I might
consider to be a primary model.
It's very simple, there's a key predictor
and there's only one confounder.
And so you may need to consider
other things later on, but
this is sometimes good as a primary model.
On the other hand,
sometimes we'll use a primary model
that doesn't have any confounders.
And then slowly add things to the mall
to see how our results change.
So the example I'm going to use here is
going to be an advertising campaign for
a new product.
Imagine you're selling something and
you're thinking you're buying ads on
Facebook and you wanna know how
effective those ads are gonna be.
So ultimately what you wanna
do is sell more products and
make more money from this.
And so one thing you might do is try to
pilot a one week experiment where you buy
Facebook ads for a week and
see how it does.
So this is a very simple design,
you might say look at the one week before
the ad campaign,
the one week during the ad campaign.
And then the one week after
the ad campaign just to see
how the sales numbers change
while you're running the ads.
Then you could compare the total sales for
the three weeks during,
the three weeks before and
the three weeks after.
And see if there is any reasonable
increase in the total sales.
So using this type of design and
this kind of experiment what
would you expect to see?
So here's a data set that's not real, but
it kind of represents the ideal scenario
for what you might see in
an experiment like this.
So in the first seven days you have
an average about 200 dollars per day.
Then the next 7 days,
this is during the campaign,
you have an average of about $300.
And then after the campaign finishes you
have an average of, again, about $200.
So it's possible to tell just from this
graph, without doing anything fancy,
that the ad campaign seems to add about
$100 per day to the total daily sales.
So, in this case,
your primary model might be very simple,
it might look something like this.
Where you have Y, is the outcome,
that would be the daily sales.
And then X is just an indicator of
whether a given day fell during
the ad campaign or not.
And then still your primary
interest is on the coefficient beta
which tells you how your total daily sales
increases with the ad campaign in place.
So for example, the data for
this might look something like this in
this table here where you have 21 days.
And you have seven days without the
campaign, seven days with the campaign,
and seven days without.
I can see that the daily sales change
as you go in and out of the campaign.
So it's a very basic setup,
very simple, and
this is kinda what you would love to
see in your data in an ideal world.
Of course, in reality,
you will never see data like this.
There will always be
something more complicated.
So here is a picture of
what kinda more realistic
data might look like from
an experiment like this.
Typically real world data are more noisy.
There are other trends in the background
that are kind of messing up your
relationship.
So it makes it harder to analyze the data.
So you'll notice that in this
picture there does appear
to be an increase in sales
during the campaign period.
But the problem is that it seems
like the increase started,
actually before the campaign even started,
the sales were kind of going up.
And so you might wanna ask,
well are there background trends that for
some reason increase sales
over a three week period?
So it's possible that we would've
seen higher sales in the product,
even without the ad campaign,
just because of these background trends.
And so
the question you really wanna know is,
did the ads cause an increase in sales.
Over and above whatever background trends
that might of been going on that you
that you're not aware of.
So let's take our primary model,
which is just gonna be a simple model with
the outcome and indicator of the campaign.
If we use that model, what you'll
see is that we'll estimate beta,
the increase in the daily sales due to
the ad campaign to be $44.75, okay?
Now, now let's suppose we add
a background trend into our model.
So instead of the primary model where
we just had the key predictor and
the outcome, we fit the following model.
Which has a quadratic trend for time, so
this allows for kinda a little curvature,
and allows for kind of rising and
falling of the daily total sales.
Okay, so if we use this model, and
we still try to estimate beta,
what we get is that the,
our estimate of beta is $39.86.
So that's somewhat less than the beta
that we estimated for the primary model.
And recall that this is the increase
in sales due to the ad campaign.
So just for comparison, we can fit
actually even more complex model.
We could have a fourth order
polynomial to model the trend,
just in case there might be something more
complicated going on in the background.
And then if we were to fit that model,
this gives us a beta of $49.10 per day.
So under this model, the ad campaign added
an extra $49.10 per day to our sales.
So we have three models.
One primary model and
two secondary models.
And so, model one tells us that
our estimate of beta is $44.75.
Model two tells us it's $39.86, and
model three tells us it's $49.10.
So, what do we do with this?
So there are a number of ways to
evaluate your formal modeling and
your examination of primary and
secondary models.
The first thing you want to
look at is the effect size.
So the effect size essentially is what
is the value of beta that you estimate.
And is it big or is it small, or
how do they compare to each
other from the different models?
So the three different models represent
a range of going from roughly $39 to $49.
And so you might wanna ask
yourself is that a big range?
Do you care about those differences?
It's a little hard to answer that
question without knowing kind
of what the context is and
what your situation is.
For example, if the cost of the ad
campaign were really low, and
it didn't really matter how much you
made as long as you made something.
Then maybe you don't care
whether it's $39 or $49.
As long as you make something back,
then the ad campaign's worth it.
On the other hand, if the ad
campaign were really expensive, so
maybe it's $20 a day to run these ads.
Then you might care which end of
the range you fall on when you
run this ad campaign, because maybe $39 is
not worth it, but $49 would be worth it.
So ultimately,
the question you're asking is is it
worth the risk of buying these ads.
Given the evidence that you've seen from
these different models showing you that
there might be a range of say,
$39 $49 increase in total sales
during the period of the ad campaign.
The second factor you wanna
think about is plausibility.
So even though we fit
many different models,
not all of them are equally plausible,
okay?
So the primary model may not be plausible,
because it didn't incorporate
the possibility of any sort
of background trend, okay?
And likely with real world data,
there's gonna be lots of things
going on in the background.
And you don't want to just forget about
them because they could affect how your
sales go, and you may think your
campaign is having a big effect.
When actually there's something just going
on in the background that's moving your
sales numbers.
Now the third model that we did which
had this kind of fourth order polynomial
was a relatively complex
model to capture a trend.
And it may be too complex or
more than we need to capture a very
simple smooth trend in the background.
And so model two seems kind of reasonable.
We allow for this background trend.
It's a polynomial model.
But it's not very complicated, or
at least not overly complicated,
to try to capture this trend.
So whether a model could
be considered more or
less plausible will depend on
your knowledge of the subject.
And your ability to map real world events
to mathematical formulations of the model.
The last concept to think of is parsimony.
When different models tell the same story,
for example,
if you don't care about the range
of $39 to $49, then it's
sometimes better to choose the simpler
model or the model with fewer parameters.
And the reason is it's usually easier
to tell a story about the data
when you have fewer parameters and
so this makes the model more useful.
And then finally a simpler
model would be more efficient
because you're using more data to
estimate fewer parameters and so
that's generally good from
a statistical standpoint.
That will afford you to have
less uncertainty about those
parameter estimates because you're able to
use more data for each of the parameters.
So in this example,
this was an associational analysis, and
it focused on estimating
the association between two features.
Total sales and the ad campaign, while
adjusting for other confounding factors,
like this potential background trend.
The primary models kind of
capture the basic relationship.
While the secondary models
are used to kind of adjust for
different factors in different ways.
So we had two different models kind of
adjusting for the background trends.
So what conclusion you make ultimately
may depend on outside factors like cost,
or kind of timing issues.
And so you have to factor all this in
when you kind of ultimately draw your
conclusions about what to do or
what decisions to make.
And also, you may have to think about
the plausibility of the various
models that you've chosen.
To determine what evidence you're gonna
weight more heavily than other evidence.
So this is the basic kinda outline
of an associational analysis.
Obviously there'll often be many more
things that you're gonna wanna do.
But they'll generally follow this
framework, and you're gonna wanna iterate
between kinda fitting primary models and
secondary models.
And so you get to an answer that you
can use or can make a decision on.